in nature death is a natural part of any
life but why is that so if a tree dies
in a forest a new tree will take its
place but that one has to grow from a
tiny tiny seed so wouldn't it be more
efficient to just keep the one that was
already there my favorite thing about
forests might just be the smell and
they've all got such distinct smells as
well like a coniferous forest will smell
differently from a forest with just
regular leaves in it but I think also
the color I mean it's something by being
surrounded by green it just makes you so
calm
[Music]
plants create the sustenance they need
to grow through a chemical process
called photosynthesis during this
process water and carbon dioxide is
converted into sugar and oxygen using
energy from the Sun this happens inside
the plant cell inside a special
compartment called the chloroplast and
every cell is full of this the
chloroplasts have pigments that absorb
sunlight the pigments can't absorb all
light so plants have specialized mostly
on red and blue while neglecting green
this means they absorb almost all life
except green which bounces back into the
environment making the pads appear green
a key part of any tree life cycle is the
loss of its leaves but why do they fall
off and why do they change color this is
mostly about nitrogen and chloroplasts
which is the compartment of the plant
cell that does photosynthesis the
nutrient most plans struggle to get
enough of is nitrogen making it very
precious and since the chloroplasts are
the basis of life in the plant kingdom
and is of high importance leaves are not
very likely to make it through a winter
making it a gamble with something you
can't afford juice so instead the tree
will draw out the nitrogen from the
leaves and break down the chlorophyll
for storage or you draw that out to the
chloroplasts are green so when the leaf
loses these it loses its green color as
well but there are so plenty of other
stuff inside it with other colors
what's left inside the leaf decides if
it turns red yellow purple or something
in between
[Music]
succession is nature's journey from an
unstable ecosystem or a nonexistent one
to a stable ecosystem and it's happening
everywhere all the time so plants need
soil to survive soil is a mixture of
grains of sand rocks and hummus hummus
in a biological sense is decayed organic
matter such as dead plants fungi insects
animals etc humus accumulation first
happens during succession first comes
the plants with low requirements from
nutrients and surface such as most moss
and lichens are the start of everything
now other plants can sprout in this
moist moss but these are usually
short-lived and when that moss is
covered with dead plants it too will die
but the death of the moss and the
pioneer plants lead to more humus
meaning that more long-lived plants can
grow
[Music]
what makes the rings of the trees is how
fast the tree grows throughout the year
in spring the tree needs to quickly
produce new cells to get water up to the
eaves because these cells were built
quickly they will have a brighter color
as summer comes along the tree will take
its time making the xylem because it
needs to be strong as it will make up
most of the tree trunk because of this
not only can we see how many summers the
tree has lived through but we can also
see how what the seasons were if the
Rings are really thin it was dried and
if the Rings are really thick it was wet
[Music]
scientists have used this to see how the
climate was in the past
mapping the weather pretty far back in
time
sometimes nature itself can interfere
unexpectedly but these disturbances can
lead to opportunities in the plant
kingdom if lightning strikes the tree
splitting the bark to the ground and a
branch falls off into some weeds these
weeds will have a tear in their surface
just like humans they can't regenerate
their skin fast enough to keep stuff out
so they must choose a different path and
their path to recovery begins with death
the cells closest to the wound must die
to create a barrier against the evils
lurking outside if they win they live
and if they lose bacteria and fungi are
gonna have a good time until the plant
is gone but the plant isn't completely
gone the nutrients that builds it up are
still there and they can be reused by
other plants to live longer and better
lives but what about the rest of the
trees struck by lightning
well since the main transporting tissue
is just inside the bark we may see a
strange phenomenon as the tree is open
to its surroundings fungi spores are
fast to attach to the core and since the
core consists of mostly dead cells this
fungi will eat up everything inside it
leaving the tree for sampling a shell
the tree is less letting out but it will
still have green leaves and keep on
living the best it can while animals can
seek shelter inside its trunk the death
of a tree can be beneficial for more
organisms too
insects can make their way inside the
tree where moths and beetles start their
lives just inside the bark as larvae
here they eat the conductive tissue of
the tree so the cells transporting water
and the cells transporting sugar from
photosynthesis
living behind Bart sounds like the
safest place to be if it wasn't for the
woodpecker the woodpecker listens
carefully and here's the larva crawling
around inside the bark and then it pecks
until it can drag it out and either eat
it or feed it to its chicks and the hold
the woodpecker just made in the tree
well fungi will invite itself in and eat
as much as it can before the tree stops
it by making a barrier in dead cells so
the opening of the bark led to larvae
and then the woodpecker and then the
fungi and in the end it created the
perfect home for an hour
[Music]
so plants are incredibly resilient but
they also have an amazing ability to
adapt to changing situations bringing
life to the toughest environments it's
all part of the fascinating world of
plants
it's also worth giving a quick shout-out
to fungi for breaking down dead stuff
without it we would be drowning in a
waste
[Music]